Add tutorials for CMOS-128 and CMOS-129 (#137)
couchbaselabs/observability: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/tutorial-onpremise.adoc

= On-premise example

include::partial$tutorial.adoc[]

== Overview

Couchbase Monitoring and Observability Stack (also known as CMOS) is a simple, out-of-the-box solution built using industry standard tooling to observe the state of a Couchbase cluster.

> CMOS can be deployed in a VM using Docker or any container runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CMOS can be deployed using Docker or any container runtime.
```

Docker can run bare-metal on Linux

ifdef::env-github[]
:imagesdir: https://github.com/couchbaselabs/observability/raw/main/docs/modules/ROOT/assets/images
endif::[]

.Microlith runtime image
image::microlith-runtime.png[]

=== Installation

At this moment, we only support deployment of CMOS using containers.
Use docker to start the CMOS container.
Alternatively, you can also use Linux container tools such as link:https://podman.io[Podman^].
To install CMOS run the command below:

[source,console]
----
docker run --name=cmos --rm -d -P couchbase/observability-stack:latest
----

==== Port Configuration

> Couchbase Monitoring and Observability Stack contains multiple services, each running on their own default port such as Grafana(3000), Prometheus(9090), Alert manager(9093), Landing page(8080), Cluster monitor(77196), and Loki(3100).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CMOS contains multiple services, each running on their own default port such as Grafana (3000), Prometheus (9090), Alertmanager (9093), Landing page (8080), and Loki (3100).
```

* Cluster Monitor's UI isn't publicly exposed for the DP
* `Alertmanager` is the official spelling
* I think it makes sense to spell out CMOS the first time it's used, then use the abbreviation afterward - @maria-robobug what do you think?

Reviewer 2: Yep, using CMOS in subsequent references is fine 👍 .

image::prometheus-target-vm.png[]

==== Grafana

From the landing page, you can go to Grafana and check the graphs.
CMOS comes with pre-installed graphs to monitor the Couchbase cluster.
Graphs with tag `couchbase-7` are relevant for Couchbase server version 7+.
For more information, check the Grafana configuration section.

.Couchbase cluster overview image
image::couchbase-cluster-overview-vm.png[]

==== Alerts

CMOS comes with pre-installed alert rules to monitor the Couchbase cluster.
Navigate to Alertmanager, prometheus UI to check the alert rules and alerts.
For more information check the prometheus and alerting configuration section.

.Alert rules image
image::prometheus-alert-rules.png[]

.Alerts image
image::prometheus-alerts.png[]

==== Loki

Loki, which is shipped with Grafana, allows access to logs of various components.
You can configure it via Configuration > Data sources > Loki > Explore.

.Loki explore dashboard image
image::loki-explore-dashboard.png[]

From the Log browser, you can enter a custom Loki query or select appropriate labels to see the logs.

.Loki log browser image
image::loki-log-browser.png[]

After that select the “Show logs” to view logs.

> You can also build  https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/getting-started/getting-started/#step-3-create-a-dashboard[custom Grafana dashboards^] based on your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also build  https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/getting-started/getting-started/#step-3-create-a-dashboard[custom Grafana dashboards^] based on your needs.

[NOTE]
====
You will need to install and configure Fluent Bit on your Couchbase Server nodes before logs will be sent to Loki.
Refer to the xref:deployment-fluentbit.adoc[Fluent Bit install guidance].
====
```

IMHO worth calling out since this isn't the default behaviour (if you think this admonition should be elsewhere in this section feel free to move it).

=== Verification

You can verify whether the CMOS container is up and running by navigating to the CMOS landing page on port 8080.

To check the port mapping in your host, run the command below:

[source,console]
----
docker container port cmos 8080
----

[console]
----
# output
0.0.0.0:55124
:::55124
----

.CMOS landing image
image::cmos-landing.png[]

==== Add Cluster

If you don't have an existing Couchbase cluster setup, you can install it from https://docs.couchbase.com/server/current/install/getting-started-docker.html#section_jvt_zvj_42b[here^].
To monitor a Couchbase cluster, you can add it using the add cluster option on the landing page.

.Add cluster image
image::add-cluster-vm.png[]

As soon as you add a cluster, you will see a Grafana URL where you can view inventory and metrics of Couchbase server clusters.

.Couchbase inventory image
image::couchbase-inventory-vm.png[]

==== Prometheus

From the landing page, you can go to the prometheus target page and check if the added cluster target is up or down.

.Prometheus target image
image::prometheus-target-vm.png[]

==== Grafana

From the landing page, you can go to Grafana and check the graphs.

> CMOS comes with pre-installed graphs to monitor the Couchbase cluster.
> Graphs with tag `couchbase-7` are relevant for Couchbase server version 7+.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CMOS comes with pre-installed dashboards to monitor the Couchbase cluster.
Dashboards with tag `couchbase-7` are relevant for Couchbase server version 7+.
```

For more information, check the Grafana configuration section.

.Couchbase cluster overview image
image::couchbase-cluster-overview-vm.png[]

==== Alerts

CMOS comes with pre-installed alert rules to monitor the Couchbase cluster.

> Navigate to Alertmanager, prometheus UI to check the alert rules and alerts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigate to the Prometheus UI to see the rules, or Alertmanager to see the alerts.
```
